new section about migrating 3.2 servers to 4 (#467)
SUSE/doc-susemanager: modules/upgrade/pages/migrate-3x-4x.adoc

[[bp.chap.mgr.migration]]
= Migrating {productname} from Version 3.2 to Version 4

The migration from {productname} 3.2 to {productname} 4 works in the same way as the migration from {productname} 2.1 to {productname} 3.
The migration happens from the original machine to a new one.
There is no in-place migration.
While this has the drawback that you temporarily need two machines, it also has the advantage that the original machine will remain fully functional in case something goes wrong.

.Migration Process
[IMPORTANT]
====
The whole process may be tricky, so it is strongly advised that the migration is done by an experienced consultant.
====

> Given the complexity of the product, the migration is an "`all-or-nothing`" procedure{mdash}if something goes wrong you will need to start all over.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the complexity of the product, the migration is an "all or nothing" procedure, so if something goes wrong you will need to start over.
```

Error handling is very limited.

> Nevertheless it should work more or less out of the box if all the steps are carefully executed as documented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nevertheless, it should work correctly if you follow these instructions carefully.
```

.Time-Consuming Operation
[NOTE]
====
The migration involves dumping the whole database on the source machine and restoring it on the target machine.

> Also all of the channels and packages need to be copied to the new machine, so expect the whole migration to take several hours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the channels and packages then need to be copied to the new machine.
You should expect the entire process to take several hours.
```

====

[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.prereq]]
== Prerequisites

.Latest Updates
[WARNING]
====
The source machine needs to run {productname} 3.2 with all the latest updates applied.
Before starting the migration process, make sure that the machine is up to date and all updates have been installed sucessfully.
====

During migration the database from the source machine needs to get dumped and this dump needs to be temporarily stored on the target system.

> The dump gets compressed with [command]``gzip`` using the default compression options (maximum compression only yields about 10 % of space savings but costs a lot of runtime); so check the disk usage of the database with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dump gets compressed with [command]``gzip`` using the default compression options (maximum compression only yields about 10% of space savings but costs a lot of runtime).
Check the disk usage of the database with:
```

----
{prompt.root}du -sch /var/lib/pgsql/data
----

> Then ensure that you have at least 30 % of this value available in [path]``/var/spacewalk/tmp``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that you have at least 30% of this value available in [path]``/var/spacewalk/tmp``.
```

These values from a test migration should aid in illustrating space requirements:

----
f204:/var/lib/pgsql # du -sch data
1,8G    data
1,8G    total
f204:/var/spacewalk/packages # ls -lh /var/spacewalk/tmp/susemanager.dmp.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 506M Jan 12 14:58 /var/spacewalk/tmp/susemanager.dmp.gz
----

> This is a small test installation; for bigger installations the ratio might be better (space required for the database dump might be less than 30 %).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example is from a small test installation.
For larger installations the ratio might be better (space required for the database dump might be less than 30%).
```

. Temporary Storage Space
[NOTE]
====

> The dump will be written to the directory [path]``/var/spacewalk/tmp``, the directory will be created if it does not exist yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dump will be written to the directory [path]``/var/spacewalk/tmp``.
The directory will be created if it does not exist.
```

> If you want the dump to be stored somewhere else, change the definition of the variable [var]``$TMPDIR`` on the beginning of the script to suit your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want the dump to be stored somewhere else, change the definition of the variable [var]``$TMPDIR`` at the beginning of the script to suit your needs.
```

====

[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.setup.target]]
== Setting Up the Target Machine

To prepare the target machine (with the example host name ``suma40``) proceed as follows:

[[proc.mgr.migration.setup.target]]
.Procedure: Setup Target Machine

> . On the target machine install "`{productname}`" Server 4.0 with the Unified Installer ({sle} 15 SP1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the target machine, install "`{productname}`" Server 4.0 with the Unified Installer ({sle} 15 SP1).
```

> +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For more information about installing {productname}, see <<install-server-unified>>.

> . Initiate [command]``yast2 susemanagersetup`` as you would normally do for a setup of {productname}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Run [command]``yast2 susemanagersetup`` to set up {productname}.
```

. On the first {productname} setup screen, ensure that [guimenu]``Migrate a SUSE Manager compatible server`` is marked instead of [guimenu]``Set up SUSE Manager from scratch``.

> . On the second screen, enter the name of the source system as [guimenu]``Hostname of source SUSE Manager Server`` as well as the domain name. Also enter the database credentials of the source system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. On the second screen, enter the name of the source system as [guimenu]``Hostname of source SUSE Manager Server`` as well as the domain name. 
Enter the database credentials of the source system.
```

> . On the next screen, you need to specify the IP address of the {productname} 4 target system.

Reviewer: Can we give the screens proper names? First, second, and next are confusing.

> Normally this value should be pre-set to the correct value and you only should need to press kbd:[Enter].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, this parameter should default to the correct value and you only should need to press kbd:[Enter].
```

Only in the case of multiple IP addresses you might need to specify the one that should be used during migration.
+
.Faking the Host Name
IMPORTANT: During the migration process, the target system will fake its host name to be the same as the source system, this is necessary as the host name of a {productname} installation is vital and should not be changed once set.

> Therefore do not be confused when logging in to your systems during migration; they both will present you with the same host name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be careful when you log in to your systems during migration; they both will present you with the same host name.
```

+

. Continue by following the normal installation steps.
+
.Database Parameters

> IMPORTANT: Specify the database parameters using the same database parameters as the source system is recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IMPORTANT: Specify the database parameters using the same database parameters as the source system.
```

> At least, using the the same database credentials as when creating the source or original {productname} database is mandatory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if you intend to change it later on, during migration you must use the the same database credentials as the original {productname} database.
```

. After all the data has been gathered, {yast} will terminate.

> The actual migration will not start automatically but needs to be triggered manually as outlined in <<bp.sec.mgr.migration.performing>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.performing]]
== Performing the Migration

> The migration is performed by excecuting the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The migration will not start automatically.
You will need to trigger it manually, with this command:
```

----
/usr/lib/susemanager/bin/mgr-setup -m
----

> This command reads the data gathered during <<proc.mgr.migration.setup.target>>, sets up {productname} onto a new target machine and transfers all of the data from the source machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command reads the data that was gathered during the setup procedure, sets up {productname} onto the new target machine, and transfers all of the data from the source machine.
```

> As several operations need to be performed on the source machine via SSH, you will be prompted once for the root password of the source machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several operations need to be performed on the source machine using SSH, so you will be prompted once for the root password of the source machine.
```

A temporary SSH key named `migration-key` is created and installed on the source machine, so you need to give the {rootuser} password only once.
The temporary SSH key will be deleted after successful migration.

> Ideally, this is all you will need to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Depending on the size of the installation, the actual migration will take up to several hours.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on the size of the installation, the migration can take several hours.
```

> When successfully finished, you will be notified ("_Migration complete._") and prompted to shut down the source machine, re-configure the network of the target machine to use the same IP address and host name as the original machine and restart it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the migration has finished successfully, you will be notified ("_Migration complete._") and prompted to shut down the source machine.
Re-configure the network of the target machine to use the same IP address and host name as the original machine and restart it.
```

> It should now be a fully functional replacement for your previous {productname} 3.2  installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The target machine is now a fully functional replacement for your previous {productname} 3.2  installation.
```

> The following numbers illustrate the runtime for dumping and importing the database:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These numbers from a test installation illustrate the approximate time it takes to dump and import the database:
```

----
14:53:37   Dumping remote database to /var/spacewalk/tmp/susemanager.dmp.gz on target system. Please wait...
14:58:14   Database successfully dumped. Size is: 506M
14:58:29   Importing database dump. Please wait...
15:05:11   Database dump successfully imported.

> ----

Reviewer: I actually think having this raw data is a bit confusing. Just the next bit alone would probably be fine, as long as you specify the size of the test database.

Author: ok, i addressed it separately

> For this example dumping the database takes around five minutes to complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a test installation with a 500MB database, we recorded these times:
* Dumping the database took around five minutes
```

Author: addressed separately

> Importing the dump onto the target system will take an additional seven minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Importing the dump onto the target system took an additional seven minutes
```

For big installations this can take up to several hours.
You should also account for the time it takes to copy all the package data to the new machine.
Depending on your network infrastructure and hardware, this can also take a significant amount of time.

[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.speedup]]

> == Speeding up the Migration

Reviewer: I don't think there needs to be a separate heading here, it directly relates to the previous information.

Author: addressed separately

A complete migration can consume a lot of time.
This is caused by the amount of data that must be copied.
Total migration time can be greatly decreased by eliminating the need to copy data prior to performing the migration (for example, channels, packages, auto-install images, and any additional data).
You can gather all data via {yast} by running:

----
mgr-setup -r
----

> Executing [command]``mgr-setup -r`` will copy the data from the old server to the new one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [command]``mgr-setup -r`` command copies the data from the old server to the new one.
```

> This command may be run at any time and your current server will remain fully functional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command can be run at any time and your current server will remain fully functional.
```

When the migration has been initiated only data changed since running [command]``mgr-setup -r`` will need to be transferred.
This significantly reduces downtime.

> On large installations transfering the database (which involves dumping the database onto the source machine and then importing the dump onto the target system) will still take some time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On large installations, transferring the database (which involves dumping the database onto the source machine and then importing the dump onto the target system) will still take some time.
```

> During the database transfer no write operations should occur therefore the migration script will shut down any {productname} database services running on the source machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the database transfer no write operations should occur.
To avoid this, the migration script shuts down any {productname} database services running on the source machine.
```

[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.pkg.extern]]
== Packages on External Storage

> Some installations may store the package data on external storage (for example, NFS mount on [path]``/var/spacewalk/packages``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have package data on external storage (for example, if you have an NFS mount at [path]``/var/spacewalk/packages``), you do not need to copy this data to the new machine.
```

> You do not need to copy this data to the new machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Edit the script located in [path]``/usr/lib/susemanager/bin/mgr-setup`` and remove the respective [command]``rsync`` command (located around line 442).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After migration has completed, edit the script located in [path]``/usr/lib/susemanager/bin/mgr-setup`` and remove the respective [command]``rsync`` command (it will be around line 442).
```

.Mounting External Storage
[IMPORTANT]
====
Make sure your external storage is mounted on the new machine before starting the system for the first time.

> Analogue handling for [path]``/srv/www/htdocs/pub`` if appropriate.

Reviewer: What does this mean?

Author: > What does this mean?

I guess it means:

"Also make sure  [path]``/srv/www/htdocs/pub`` is mounted if it exists on an external storage device."

@mantel , what do you think?

Author: addressed it with a separate commit.

> In general, all needed files and directories, not copied by the migration tool, should be copied to the new server manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All other required files and directories that have not been copied by the migration tool, should be manually copied to the new server.
```

====

[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.trouble]]
== Troubleshooting

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes some common problems found after migration.
```

> === Broken {webui} after Migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== {webui} Fails to Load
```

It is possible that the {webui} may break during migration.
This behavior is not a bug, but a browser caching issue.
The new machine has the same host name and IP address as the old machine.
This duplication can confuse some Web browsers.
If you experience this issue reload the page.

> For example, in Firefox pressing the key combination kbd:[Ctrl+F5] should resume normal functionality.

Reviewer: These should probably be re-written in CCFR format, but I'll leave that up to you ;)

Author: @Loquacity "CCFR format"? I cannot solve this riddle ;-(

Reviewer: Sorry!  Cause-Consequence-Fix-Result. That's the format I implemented in the Troubleshooting section of the Admin Guide:

> One sentence each:
> Cause: What created the problem?
> Consequence: What does the user see when this happens?
> Fix: What can the user do to fix this problem?
> Result: What happens after the user has completed the fix?
> 
> If more detailed instructions are required, put them in a "Resolving" procedure:
> .Procedure: Resolving Widget Wobbles
> . First step
> . Another step
> . Last step

Author: ok, fair request.  Nevertheless, I'll probably postpone it a little bit.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's fair enough.

===  Corrupted Database Dump

Check the output of the following command (replace [literal]``<SUMA_3.2_MACHINE>`` with the actual host name of your 3.2 source machine):

----
ssh root@<SUMA_3.2_MACHINE> "su -s /bin/bash - postgres -c exit"
----

This command must not produce any output.
Output can lead to a corrupted transfer of the archive with the database dump. Re-visit your bash environment on the 3.2 source machine (for example, the [filename]``.bashrc`` file) and make sure no extra text is printed on the shell start.

=== Retrying to Set Up the New Server

To retry setting up the new server, perform the following step on the new server machine:

. remove /root/.MANAGER_SETUP_COMPLETE
. stop postgresql and remove /var/lib/pgsql/data
. set the hostname correctly (it now has the host name from the old {productname} server)
. correct the /etc/hosts file
. on the new server check /etc/setup_env.sh and see if the correct database name is set:
+
----
MANAGER_DB_NAME='susemanager'
----
. reboot the server before running [command]``mgr-setup`` again.

// FIXME: 2019-05-016, ke: replace it with version 4 output
[[bp.sec.mgr.migration.example]]
== Example Session

> 

Reviewer 2: This should be left out as it is from a previous migration (from 2.1 to 3). While most of the stuff will still look similar, there are some details (such as version numbers) that do not match. I don't think this output is very useful anyway.

Author: ok, it is not very useful, but it helps if the user can compare it with the output he see on his screen. Only if he see the complete msg at the end, he will know that everything(?) was fine (I'll add such a note, then we'll not need the literal output):

```  ============================================================================
  Migration complete.
  Please shut down the old SUSE Manager server now.
  Reboot the new server and make sure it uses the same IP address and hostname
  as the old SUSE Manager server!

  IMPORTANT: Make sure, if applicable, that your external storage is mounted
  in the new server as well as the ISO images needed for distributions before
  rebooting the new server!
  ============================================================================```
